Contents1	Introduction	22	Scope and Purpose	23	Definitions	24	Residents Money and Valuables	35	Procedure for Handling Money on Behalf of an Individual	56	Procedure for Storing Valuables	77	Procedure for Auditing	98	Procedure for Returning Money and Valuables when Leaving MHA	109	Procedure for Unknown Ownership of Items	1210	Procedure for Abandoned Items	1311	Roles and Responsibilities	1512	Training and Monitoring	1813	Communication and Dissemination	1814	EDI Impact Assessment	1915	Resources	1916	Appendices	1917	Version Control	221 Introduction1.1 MHA have a duty of care regarding money and valuables given to us for safekeeping by people using our services. The aim of this policy is to protect those who use MHA’s Care Homes and Retirement Living Schemes from any risk associated with the handling of personal spending money and safekeeping of valuables.2 Scope and Purpose2.1 This policy is relevant for all MHA colleagues across MHA Care Homes and Retirement Living Schemes for the purpose of:• Safeguarding residents from any risk associated with the handling of personal spending money and safekeeping of valuables.• Providing secure working practices for the effective handling and safeguarding of individuals money and valuables in an efficient manner to protect its personnel and be accountable to individuals and their next of kin.• Ensuring that all cash and valuables in a home or scheme’s safe are accounted for and appropriate records kept.• Ensuring that any discrepancies/theft/loss of resident’s monies is reported to the local authority safeguarding team and CQC notification completed for possible financial abuse.3 DefinitionsTermDefinitionApproved RepresentativeSomeone who has been approved by the individual to accept their money and valuables on behalf of them (e.g., NOK).A SafeA secure lockable box used for securing valuable objects against theft or fire.Valuables and Valuable ItemsAn object of personal property of great worth to its owner.4 Residents Money and Valuables4.1 Residents across MHA’s Care Homes and Retirement Living Schemes must be encouraged to take responsibility for their own money and valuables and keep them safe, as far as they are able to do so.4.2 Accepted means of resident’s money include cash, bank transfers, cheques, and where necessary (and with area manager approval) postal orders. For any queries relating to accepted means, contact Operational Finance.4.3 All cheques received in care homes and schemes should:• Be made payable to MHA• Sent to Central Support using Cash Banked and Cheques Received Form, a copy of the completed form should be kept locally. • If for resident personal monies, this must be stated on the cheque alongside the resident’s reference number.4.4 Security Measures4.4.1 Security measures relating to safe inventory must comply with those set out in the Petty Cash Policy and Amenity Funds Policy.4.4.2 The cash and valuables of those using MHA’s Care Homes must be checked in and out by two people together - the individual with capacity or a Power of Attorney, a family member, or two senior members of colleague (one colleague for Retirement Living Schemes).4.4.3 Access to the safe and the safe key must be restricted to a small number of people who have a genuine business need to access the safe, such as Managers, Deputy Managers, Administration Manager or a designated Out of Hours and holiday cover member of colleague.4.4.4 Keys must be controlled and logged as per, Security and Key Holding Policy4.4.5 Trips to the bank, must not be part of a routine or follow a pattern for personal security reasons.4.4.6 Cash carried by an individual at any point in time should not exceed £1,500, if this limit is exceeded another person is required to accompany them for safety.4.5 Insurance4.5.1 Residents must be strongly advised to take out their own insurance to cover "all risks" if the value of all items combined, exceeds the overall personal effects insurance limit of £2,500 for residents in Care Homes. MHA’s insurance covers the following: • Money held overnight (provided the safe keys are not kept in the same part of the building), is insured for set amounts only. Please contact MHA’s legal team for exact amounts: legal@mha.org.uk*• Personal effects of individuals are covered up to an inclusive total of £2,500 per resident, in care homes.• Valuable items (whether kept in individuals’ rooms or in a secure facility at the home) are covered.• * If cash held for an individual exceeds £250, please contact the relevant colleague in Operational Finance or the Individuals Accounts Team Leader.• There is no cover for personal effects for residents of Retirement Living. It is advised that residents obtain their own individual contents insurance. 5 Procedure for Handling Money on Behalf of an Individual5.1 Care Homes5.1.1 Some individuals may not be able to be responsible for custody of the money they use for their personal needs, so the home manage this for them with consent from either the individual, or advocate / Power of Attorney – the legal documents that state this must be uploaded to Caresys and kept in the resident’s file. 5.1.2 The home manager should authorise larger spending or out of the ordinary spending for residents who aren’t responsible for their own money. 5.1.3 A record of cash deposited must be recorded on Caresys for each individual whose personal spending money is managed by MHA, and must show:• The date• Receipt number• Amount deposited / Amount withdrawn.• Balance• Transaction details• Individuals’ or representative's signature, for each movement of money5.1.4 Care Homes must store the money for each individual using a one pot system.5.1.5 For Retirement Living, the money held for each individual should be stored using the preferred local system.5.1.6 Caresys must be used to record a log of each individual balance, with separate receipts kept for each individuals spend.5.1.7 A two-weekly reconciliation of all individuals' money must be made by the administration manager and the records signed and dated to indicate that this has been done and the person responsible. This reconciliation must be countersigned by the home manager. 5.1.8 The manager and administration manager on their behalf must ensure that a record of all money kept in the home or scheme is maintained correctly on Caresys including the date deposited, returned, or used (including the purpose for which used). A printed and signed receipt must be kept in the residents file for all transactions entered on CareSys.5.1.9 For each petty cash submission there must be a reconciliation of the sub-imprest balance.5.1.10 The sum of money held in the sub-imprest for individuals but not yet banked must equal the amount of the sub-imprest.5.1.11 When cash is received from or on behalf of a resident, the following must be recorded in Caresys:• Amount of money• Date received.• From whom received?• A Caresys generated receipt is also to be given to the individuals or representative from Caresys, signed by the member or colleague. 5.1.12 When money is returned, the following must be recorded in Caresys:• Date returned.• Who returned the money?5.1.13 Money held on behalf of individuals must be:• Reconciled to the balance in Caresys at least monthly and validated by the home manager however reconciliation twice monthly is advised.5.2 Retirement Living Schemes5.2.1 A record of cash deposited must be recorded on the schemes Retirement Living Money Safekeeping Record for each individual whose personal spending money is managed by MHA, and must show:• The date• Receipt number• Amount deposited / Amount withdrawn.• Balance• Transaction details• Individuals’ or representative's signature, for each movement of money5.2.2 A monthly audit of all individuals' money must be completed and signed by a manager. This audit can be completed using the Safe Inventory Log and Audit Form.6 Procedure for Storing Valuables6.1 Care Homes6.1.1 Safe inventory checks help to reduce the risk of errors and / or fraud regarding the personal monies and valuables of those using MHA’s services.6.1.2 Store items in plastic money bags or plastic zip bags one per person / item(s). The bag must be clearly labelled with the person’s name, item, date of ‘hand-in’ and signature of receiver. Do not use paper envelopes as they degrade / tear.6.1.3 For large or bulky valuable items that cannot be accommodated in a safe, the next of kin or advocate (chosen with the agreement of the individual and in accordance with the individual's wishes) must be approached and the item passed to them for safe keeping. In which case, this must be recorded on the Safe Inventory Log and Audit Form. See Appendix 1 for the step-by-step procedure for recording on the safe inventory checklist.6.1.4 All valuable items in and out of the safe must be logged using the Safe Inventory Log and Audit Form inclusive of the following information:• The type of item• The date they were deposited and / or taken out of the safe• The owner of item • Provide a description of the item - be specific in the description of valuables (i.e., no mention of gold or precious stones as you cannot validate the material, so use words such as shiny white metal, clear stones etc and photograph wearing)• Valuables must be photographed (preferably with the person wearing the item), labelled with the person’s name & date and digitally stored.• Use the notes column to record what has happened to the item(s) when they have been taken out of the safe (i.e., handed back to individual or family.• Items being removed from the date can be ‘archived’ from the form.6.1.5 The following diagram (1) is a flow chart depicting the process of putting money and valuables “in and out” of the safe:6.2 Retirement Living Schemes6.2.1 Retirement Living Schemes are not permitted to store valuables on behalf of residents, in exceptional circumstances (for example, a lost valuable is found), the manager should store the item in the safe and contact the NOK as soon as possible to hand the valuable over to them. For advice on this, and for abandoned items, managers should seek support from their Area Manager.7 Procedure for Auditing7.1 The Safe Inventory Log and Audit Form must also be used as an audit schedule to be completed quarterly for Care Homes, and monthly for Retirement Living Schemes, with the aim of reducing / limiting the amount of ‘unknown’ stock in a safe. 7.2 Every quarter, the administration manager must complete the safe inventory log and audit form, the home or scheme manager must sign their approval. Abandoned items must be recorded on the safe inventory check immediately (see abandoned items sections for more information). Historic checks must be kept for auditing. All safe audits must be retained for 3 years.7.3 Diagram 3 is a flow chart depicting the quarterly audit process (for care homes):8 Procedure for Returning Money and Valuables when Leaving MHA8.1 After the discharge or death of someone using MHA’s services, the home or scheme must promptly return the individuals personal belongings including money and other valuables stored in the safe to the individuals next of kin or prior agreed representative when they come into the home or scheme to clear the individual’s room or apartment.8.2 For Care Homes, the individual’s representative must sign and date the receipt printed from Caresys, which must be countersigned by the member of colleagues dealing with the handover. The Caresys receipt must then be handed to the home or scheme manager to sign to confirm the handover.8.3 If the representative is missed when they visit in the home / scheme to clear the room or apartment, the money is to be withdrawn on CareSys and entered onto the PC return as income, stating the residents name. Inform finance that this has been completed and request them to process the refund by adding a note onto the CareSys records.8.4 The same procedure would apply if monies were to be returned to the Social Services (in cases where there is no next of kin or representative and take on the responsibility for the individual’s personal monies). The CareSys receipt, must then be handed to the home or scheme manager to sign to confirm the handover.8.5 If at the request of the representative, the monies or valuables held are to be donated to MHA, see Donation of Overpaid Resident Fees Policy and Procedure. For Care Homes, this must be clearly documented in Caresys using transaction forms. For Retirement Living Schemes, the Area Manager must be notified. For valuables, follow the abandoned items procedures set out below.8.6 The completed deceased individual’s personal monies sheet in Caresys (for care homes only) (using transaction forms) must be retained (not archived) to enable the appropriate compliance to check on the annual financial health check.8.7 Individual’s monies held in the income section at Epworth House will automatically be returned to individuals agreed representative when the individual is discharged on Caresys.8.8 Administration of Cash Held for an Individual’s Departure8.9  If an individual leaves the home or scheme to another care provider then the money / valuables held must be passed back to the individual or next of kin and the records appropriately updated, following the same procedure as for a deceased individual.8.10 If an individual or their legal representative decides not to claim their items (stored in the safe), follow the procedure for “abandoned items” in section 10.9 Procedure for Unknown Ownership of Items 9.1 Care Homes9.1.1 The procedure for unknown ownership of items refers to all items that fit into the safe, this does not include the likes of bulky items such as furniture. All safe sized items with unknown ownership regardless of perceived value must be dealt with following this procedure.9.1.2 If an item is found or left behind at MHA (regardless of perceived value), Managers must do what they can (in reason) to find the owners of the item. This may include mentioning an item has been lost at relative’s meetings, calling the family members of recently deceased individuals who use the service, or those who have recently left the service. However, Managers are advised to ask the individuals who are informed to describe the lost items rather than a lost item being presented or described directly to them. Managers should seek guidance from their Area Manager for support if needed, or if in doubt. 9.1.3 All attempts to find the owner of a lost item must be documented in the Safe Inventory Log and Audit Form as evidence that all reasonable ways to find the owner have been exhausted.9.1.4 After 6 months (from the item being recorded as lost), the lost item is considered as ‘abandoned’ by law and ownership is transferred to MHA (see next section for abandoned items procedure). All evidence of attempts to find the owners of the items must be recorded, after the items become abandoned and belong to MHA (after 6 months), lost items can no longer be claimed.9.1.5 See Appendix 2 for additional guidance.9.2 Retirement Living Schemes9.2.1 Retirement Living Schemes are not permitted to store valuables on behalf of residents, in exceptional circumstances (for example, a lost valuable is found), the manager should store the item in the safe and contact the NOK as soon as possible to hand the valuable over to them. For advice on this, and for abandoned items, managers should seek support from their Area Manager.10 Procedure for Abandoned Items10.1 Care Homes10.1.1 If a resident has credit in their personal money account that has been abandoned (in line with eligibility procedure for abandoned items set out in this policy), this can be paid into the homes amenity fund for balances less than £100. For balances over £100, the money can be paid into petty cash fund as a credit to be returned to MHA. All abandoned personal money transfers must be approved by the homes area manager prior to transferring into any fund.10.1.2 All items within the safe that are considered as abandoned (after 6 months) should be dealt with in line with the procedure set out in this policy document. The home must securely dispose of obvious non-value items, such as teeth, club cards bus passes, bank cards, ID cards, passports, driving licences and personal documentation. If any items are identified which may be considered dangerous, the home must contact the Fundraising Team to agree the appropriate course of action.  10.1.3 All other items regardless of perceived value must be sent to MHA’s central support Fundraising Team by guaranteed next day, special delivery (not recorded) to the following address:Fundraising TeamMHA, Epworth House, Stuart St, Derby DE1 2EQ10.1.4 The sending date and tracking number must be recorded in the Safe Inventory Log and Audit Form. For any questions on delivery of abandoned items to central support, contact the Fundraising Team at fundraisingenquiries@mha.org.uk.10.1.5 Colleagues must check through bags and purses and other enclosed objects to double check for valuables such as cash which should be banked locally (amenity funds).10.1.6 Foreign currency can still be sent to central support as it is exchanged for GBP.10.1.7 Note: There is no need to ask permission from Fundraising prior to sending items by special delivery. However, an electronic copy of the Safe Inventory Log and Audit Form should be emailed to the address in 10.1.3 when the package is posted, to alert the team of an impending delivery. The tracking number of the package should be shared with the fundraising team in this email. A copy of the Safe Inventory Log and Audit Form must also be included in the package. Once received and checked, the fundraising team will send a brief email to confirm receipt.  10.2 Retirement Living Schemes10.2.1 Retirement Living Schemes are not permitted to store valuables on behalf of residents, in exceptional circumstances (for example, a lost valuable is found), the manager should store the item in the safe and contact the NOK as soon as possible to hand the valuable over to them. For advice on this, and for abandoned items, managers should seek support from their Area Manager.10.3 Central Support Procedure for Abandoned Items10.3.1 Once the package is delivered to the Fundraising Team. the procedure will be as follows (please note, MHA do not value any items, this is completed externally):a) All items will be logged by the team in a Fundraising held spreadsheet which will include date of item received, the location the item was received from, a brief description of the item including colour, sealed bag number, and the initials of the colleague who logged the items and a second colleague who initials to verify that the item has been logged.b) Items will be sealed in numbered bags (corresponding with spreadsheet) and placed into designated central support location (safe).c) Logged items will be taken to a local (Derby based) auction house on a regular basis for valuing. All valued items will be sold by the same auction house and 100% of the proceeds will be donated back to MHA’s overall general charitable funds to help people to live later life well.d) Items that are determined to have little to no value (by the auction house) will be discarded by MHA (fundraising team).10.3.2 Fundraising colleagues should accumulate foreign currency which can then be exchanged for GBP once enough has been accumulated.11 Roles and ResponsibilitiesRoleResponsibilitiesAll Colleagues• To comply with this policy. To report any found “unknown ownership” items to the manager.Administration Manager (Care Homes)• Ultimately accountable for the day-to-day management, security, and compliance with this policy.• Must ensure the record of transactions is complete and up to date.• Must ensure there is evidence retained to support transactions.• With the support of the home or scheme manager, the administration manager is also responsible for (scheme / home manager has ultimate responsibility):• Keeping the overall level of cash kept at the Home / Scheme is as low as possible and within MHA’s insurance limits for cash (£200 per individuals and less than £10k per safe).• Meal monies are handed to the Administration Manager who must bank and include this on the petty cash return on a regular basis.• Fees held on to behalf of a deceased individuals are returned to the next of kin within one month. • Donations are promptly passed to the amenity fund treasurer unless managed locally by the Administration Manager.• Items handed in for safekeeping by individuals (cash, valuables etc) are recorded and returned to the rightful owner as soon as practically possible.Care Home Managers and Managers within Retirement Living Schemes• It is the Manager’s responsibility to ensure that the cash limit for each individual is not exceeded for insurance purposes. • To manage cash on behalf of those using MHA services when they cannot themselves (with relevant consent), in conjunction with the manager.• Overseeing and checking individuals’ cash and valuables are managed in compliance with this policy.• Ensuring that all procedures are followed as set out in this policy.• Ensuring monies are held in a safe and secure location.• Ensuring deceased / departure individual’s monies have been promptly returned to next of kin and records appropriately completed.• Each month the cash held for each individual must be agreed back to their records by the manager and signed to confirm they agree.Area Managers• To support managers when investigating discrepancies between the safe inventory check / audit sheet and the contents of the safe.• For Care Homes, approve abandoned money transfers to the amenity or petty cash fund (depending on eligibility) as set out in the procedure for abandoned items section of this policy.Service Administration Manager (SAM) (Care Homes)• To assist in administrating the procedures set out in this policy.Operational Finance Manager (central support)• To update the safe inventory policy (with consultation from operations) ensuring it is compliant with relevant legislation, procedures, and approaches at MHA.• To provide guidance to colleagues about this policy when requested.Fundraising Colleagues (central support)• To follow the abandoned item procedure set out in this policy. • To process abandoned items according to the procedures set out in this policy and to process any money made from selling abandoned items ensuring it is returned to MHA’s charitable fund. • To ensure all abandoned items are valued externally.12 Training and Monitoring12.1 Compliance will be assessed through direct observation, monitoring, and supervision of MHA colleagues.13 Communication and Dissemination13.1 This policy is disseminated and implemented within all MHA services through MHA’s channels of communication.13.2 Each colleague’s line manager must ensure that all teams are aware of their roles, responsibilities.13.3 This policy will be available to the people we support and their representatives in alternate formats, as required.13.4 Queries and issues relating to this policy should be referred to the Standards and Policy Team at policies@mha.org.uk14 EDI Impact Assessment14.1 Impact assessment to be confirmed.15 Resources• Safe Inventory Log and Audit Form • Retirement Living Money Safekeeping Record • Petty Cash Policy• Amenity Funds• Restricted Funds Policy• Security and Key Holding Policy• Donation of Overpaid Resident Fees Policy and Procedure• Cash Banked and Cheques Received Form16 Appendices16.1 Appendix 1: Safe Inventory Check Form GuidanceTask DescriptionTask InstructionTrigger• A resident or residents’ family have asked for a valuable(s) to be placed into the homes safe. Homes should try to encourage families to take them home if possible.Valuable in Safe• Item(s) is logged onto the Safe Inventory Check FF205a. Ensure the correct site is selected. The date will be changed automatically and does not need changing.Fill in Inventory List – Type of Item• In the ‘Type of Item’ column there is a drop down list. Select the appropriate one that best describes the item to be placed in the safe.• NOTE: Ensure items are place on the list individually i.e., a resident may have 2 rings, but these must be identified and described separately.Fill in Inventory List – Description• In the ‘Description’ column please use this section to describe the item further i.e., make and model, colour, sizes etc. Fill in Inventory List – Owner• In the ‘Owner’ column type the name of the Resident that the item belongs to.• Select ‘Unknown’ if the owner of the item is not known.Fill in Inventory List – Date Received• In the ‘Date Received’ column put the date that the item was received from the resident or resident’s family in the format dd/mm/yyyy.Fill in Inventory List – Date Returned to Owner• Only when the item(s) get returned to the resident or resident’s family then enter the date in the ‘Date Returned’ column in the format dd/mm/yyyy.Archive Returned Items• When the ‘Date Returned to Owner’ column has been completed and only then, the ‘Archive Returned Items’ button can be pressed. • This will hide this item from this list and transfer it to the ‘Historic’ tab of the spreadsheet as we no longer have the item.Save• Save the document to the S:drive. • Please note you do not need to save a daily, weekly, monthly copy just save the document over the existing one.Monthly Check• The Admin or the Care Home Manager will need to perform a Quarterly check. Ensuring what is on the Safe Inventory Check list matches with the items physically in the safe.Quarterly Audit Check• The quarterly months that the check needs to be done are Feb, May, August, and Nov  IAW (see 6) WI005. Tick the box for the month that the audit has been completed.• These quarterly months fall in line with the Q2.05 Care Home Audit Calendar.• If for whatever reason you fail to complete the check within the required month, then complete at the earliest opportunity and tick the relevant month. Then continue with the scheduled month. 16.2 Appendix 2: Unknown Owners and Abandoned Items GuidanceTask DescriptionTask InstructionEmpty Safe• Either an item is already in the safe and the owner is unknown, or an item has been found and the owner is unknown.Update Check Inventory List• Log item by identifying the ‘Type of Item’ and ‘Description’ of item.• Ensure ‘Owner’ is identified as Unknown and date when the item was placed in the safe if the item was found.• If the item was already in the safe and owner is unknown put ‘todays’ date whatever date that may be. Do not back date. Notices• During the 6 months the Home Managers will need to do everything realistically possible to try and find the owner including putting notices on the residents’ family information board.6 Month Period• Once an item has been on the list for 6 months and still unknown, the item is then legally declared abandoned.• At this point, the item can be sent to Fundraising at Central Support. Print off Check Inventory form• Print off form and highlight items that are being sent back to Epworth House.Bag Items• Bag the items along with the printed list and organise transportation with the Area Manager if possible.Archive• Press ‘Archive Returned Items button’ to transfer the item from Current List to the Historic List.Save• Save the document to the S:drive. • Please note you do not need to save a daily, weekly, monthly copy just save the document over the existing one.17 Version ControlVersionVersion DateRevision Description / Summary of Changes AuthorNext Review Date1August 2023• This policy and procedure are an amalgamation of multiple MHA policies which has been developed to clarify MHA’s policy and standard operating procedures for Residents Money and Valuables and the Safe Inventory of both.• Abandoned items are now to be sent to the Fundraising Team in Central Support.• Version ratified by the Director of Finance, IT, and Procurement.• Head of Operational Finance• Service Administration Manager• Community Fundraising Manager• Standards and Policy ManagerAugust 20252September 2023• Amendment: there is no need to ask permission from Fundraising prior to sending items by special delivery. • Community Fundraising Manage• Standards and Policy ManagerSeptember 20253October 2023• Clarification added around use of cheques.• Head of Operational Finance• Standards and Policy ManagerOctober 20254November 2023• Clarification around use of cheques and procedural details.• Any legal documents that confirm whether an individual is responsible for their own finances or not, and who is, must be uploaded to Caresys.• Care Home managers must authorise large or out of the ordinary spending for those who aren’t responsible for their own funds.•  The money held for each individual should be stored using the preferred local system, however a one pot system is preferable.• Reconciliation of residents finances must be done every two weeks (rather than monthly).• Clarification around CareSys operating procedures.• Service Administration Managers (SAM)• Standards and Policy ManagerNovember 20255January 2024• Policy renamed to Residents Money and Valuable Policy and Procedure (removal of safe inventory from title)• Colleagues must check through bags and purses and other enclosed objects to double check for valuables such as cash which should be banked locally (amenity funds).• Foreign currency can still be sent to central support as it is exchanged for GBP.• Standards and Policy Manager• Community Fundraising ManagerNovember 20256March 2024• Clarification around abandoned items procedure for resident’s finances (Care Homes).• Service Administration Manager (SAM)• Standards and Policy ManagerNovember 20257April 2024• Safe audit retention period added (3 years).• Standards and Policy ManagerNovember 20258November 2024• Edited to fit information in the Insurance Policy• Branding compliance. • Standards and Policy ManagerNovember 20259January 2025• Edited procedure for dealing with abandoned items.• Standards and Policy Manager• Head of FundraisingNovember 2025Resident’s Money and Valuables Policy and Procedure	Page 2 of 2Resident’s Money and Valuables Policy and Procedure	Page 2 of 26